In Denmark, the world's top breeder of
minks for fashion, pelts are selling at below break-even prices this
season. More than just prices are depressed.
   Overproduction, warm weather and a long campaign by animal rights
activisits have pushed many of Denmark's 5,000 mink farms to the
brink of bankruptcy.
   ``The stock market crash started it,'' said Scott Novak, who
represents a New York dealer in exclusive garments, who was here for
an international auction. ``That seemed to end that beautiful run we
had for a few years.''
   It's too early to look for bargains in buying a mink coat off the
rack, however. Sewing the furs into garments is skilled work and
labor costs along with retailers' markups are high, but prices might
drop later on.
   Danish breeders produce 35 percent of all mink furs sold in the
West. Last year 12.4 million mink pelts were sold, up from 9.1
million in 1986. At the same time, falling prices reduced income
from $394 million to $282 million.
   It's hard to determine the damage done by the animal activists,
who at times have sprayed paint on the fur coats of women in the
street.
   ``Certainly they hurt us,'' said Lester Taffer, a 59-year veteran
of the trade. ``They murdered us in Germany and other places.''
   The protests began in the 1960s to save animals in the wild from
trappers, but the scope later widened to breeding animals for their
fur.
   Skimming 0.6 percent of the turnover at auctions, the
London-based International Fur Trade Federation finances a
counter-campaign to promote the fur industry in brochures and films.
   A global fraternity of fur buyers assembled in February near
Copenhagen to bid for raw materials that will become the luxurient
apparel in shops in the fall. The Danish auction house offers the
largest collection of mink pelts in the world.
   Minks were fetching between $15 and $34 per pelt. Two seasons
ago, amid surging garment sales, the same types of pelts brought up
to 45 percent more.
   Mink production has set records.
   ``This year we'll be grading more than 15 million pelts, four
times that of the next largest fur center,'' Peter Krag, president
of Danish Fur Sales, said in an interview.
   Pelts are graded according to sex, size, color, clarity and
quality, creating hundreds of categories.
   The fur business has grown in the last 15 years from small
handicraft shops to a mass-production industry. The Far East
supplies an estimated 40 percent of finished product.
   Danish fur farming began in the 1920s with wild mink imported
from North America and fed on the abundance of fish caught in Danish
waters.
   After World War II mink production rose steadily, and Denmark
rose to become the world leader. Production has tripled since 1980.
Now the glut of mink pelts is threatening many breeders.
   Two warm winters in a row have added to furriers' woes. Everyone
in the trade is praying for an extended late-winter cold snap to
stimulate demand for fur clothing.
   Recovery from the slump in fur sales demands at least two
radically improved seasons. Even a 10 percent reduction would not
raise prices unless demand soars.
   ``The important thing is that sales companies are meeting the
market,'' said William Frick, who represents a major Hong Kong
company.
   ``Hong Kong and other large consumers of raw pelts have thus far
been purchasing conservatively, protecting themselves against a
further drop in prices. Eventually, when the market gains confidence
and orders are placed, we'll see a turnover of garments we've never
seen before. Low prices today will benefit tomorrow's consumer,'' he
said.