George, a 36-year-old former heroin addict who
beat his wife, is lying to himself.
   ``The last altercation got out of hand. But before I could
wrestle the knife from my wife's hand, six cops busted in the door
and arrested me. They didn't even want to listen to my side of the
story.''
   George can tell his story when he's at the Queens Family Conflict
Center, among six other men who have inflicted violence on their
households.
   ``I don't know how hard I hit when I get angry,'' he says. ``How
can I stay without drugs when the person lying in bed is sniffing
all the coke in town. If I continue to be passive, she's going to
bring me down...
   ``She's the one who has to get help or else I'm getting a
divorce.''
   ``If she's the one who needs help for her cocaine problem then
why are you here?'' interrupted group leader Jerome Balcom. Balcom
explained later that George ``kept on straying away from the fact
that he hit his wife.''
   More than 1.8 million women will be punched, kicked or assaulted
with a weapon this year, according to a University of New Hampshire
Family Research Lab study. About 6.25 million will be slapped or
shoved.
   ``That is assuming everyone we interviewed told all,'' said lab
director Murray A. Straus. ``In my judgment, those figures should be
doubled.''
   Experts say protective court orders may give victims of domestic
violence temporary security, but the only prevention lies in
education.
   ``Lack of communication between the sexes and the inability to
communicate without violence causes the abuser to react in the only
way he knows how,'' said Ellie Ludvigsen-Jennings of the city
Probation Department.
   The abusive male is rigid toward sex roles, and has a poor
self-image and an inability to communicate with his spouse, said
Roland Maiuro, a psychologist and director of the Harborview Anger
Management Program in Washington State.
   Seventy-five percent are drug or alcohol addicts and 98 percent
were sexually abused or beaten as children, said Ludvigsen-Jennings.
``We try to stop the pattern before it gets to the point of adult
abuse.
   ``We also help victims and adolescents because once they are
abused they, just like the men, will have the tendency to abuse as
well.
   ``Our goal is to eliminate family violence.''
   Ludvigsen-Jennings and Balcom, commander of court officers for
the state court in Westchester County, started the conflict center
in 1984 in response to an increase in domestic violence in New York
City. Its six full-time staffers and 20 volunteers run 15 programs
on issues linked to family violence, including parenting, alcohol
and drug addiction and child abuse.
   About 4,000 men have participated in five years, some
voluntarily, others under court order.
   ``We try to see them the same day they are referred,''
Ludvigsen-Jennings said. ``You can't treat violence cases like any
other cases, they need immediate intervention or somebody will get
seriously hurt.''
   The aim is to make the abuser understand why he is angry and
teach him how to deal with that aggression. ``We first teach them
that they are responsible for their actions, that they are wrong to
hurt their wives and they should learn to think before acting,''
said Ludvigsen-Jennings.
   Most men don't realize what they have done is wrong, she said.
``The man sees the woman as someone beneath him, someone who should
obey his rules. When she doesn't, he feels he has every right to
`make her' act accordingly.''
   ``When we first get them they are full of denial,'' Balcom said,
``They don't believe they've done anything wrong and they'll justify
it until they're blue in the face.''
   George was typical: ``He was trying to blame his wife's drug
habit for their altercations instead of looking at why he was angry
at her.''
   Group leaders try to convince men they should walk away when they
feel a situation is getting out of control. Eventually, the abuser
should be able to let his wife know when he is approaching a
breaking point, so she can leave before it is too late.
   The breaking point, according to Balcom, can come at any time,
but usually is after the wife becomes independent of the husband.
``Sometimes the wife goes to school, gets a better job, advances
herself. Then the man feels inferior, less in control and less
needed by the wife.''
   Counselors try to replace aggressiveness with assertiveness.
   ``You can't expect an abuser to miraculously be cured of all his
aggressions in a six-week program. It takes time to undo what years
of abuse have done,'' said Ludvigsen-Jennings. If the abuser is
caught early enough, his anger can be controlled. But the more
entrenched the pattern of violence, the greater the possibility it
won't be reversed.
   Spouse abuse is not, at its root, a marital problem _ it is an
anger problem, and even if the couple separates he will most likely
lash out again, she said. ``By not addressing the issue of learning
different ways of seeing one's self and the opposite sex (and) not
addressing the issue of what family violence does, we are dumping
more people into the criminal court system.''