Supporters of human rights champion Andrei D.
Sakharov succeeded Tuesday in forcing a second round of elections in
the Soviet Academy of Sciences for delegates to the new parliament,
improving Sakharov's chances to run.
   The official Tass news agency said only eight of 23 officially
backed candidates were elected in the first round of voting Tuesday.
Since the academy will have 20 seats in the new 2,250-seat Congress
of People's Deputies, 12 seats will be up for grabs in the next
round of elections.
   Partisans of Sakharov had hoped to defeat some of the official
candidates on the ballot _ approval of the academy's leadership was
needed to run _ and force a new round of voting with Sakharov and
other reform-minded academicians running.
   Although Sakharov had been nominated by 55 institutions for a
seat in the new legislature, his name was not among those placed on
the final candidate list by the academy's leadership.
   Under the new election law, the academy will be forced to select
new candidates and submit them to the membership.
   The voting Tuesday by more than 1,300 academy members and
delegates from top Soviet research institutes took place in the
marble-floored hall of Moscow's Palace of Youth.
   Sakharov, a physicist and dean of the Soviet human rights
movement, won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1975.
   Also Tuesday, the legislative campaign of maverick populist Boris
N. Yeltsin picked up steam as his criticism of bureaucracy and
failed economic reform received a warm welcome in his opponent's
backyard.
   Yeltsin, who has become an anti-establishment symbol in the city
that he once ran as Communist Party chief, criticized the election
law under which he is running, as well as the party itself for
nominating only 100 candidates for its 100 seats in the new
legislature.
   ``We need direct elections, from top to bottom, including for the
presidency,'' the post held by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Yeltsin said.
The party election carried out at a Central Committee meeting last
week ``is not the best example of democracy for our society,'' he
said.
   But Yeltsin said he recognized Gorbachev as the country's leader.
   ``I never have set myself up as an alternative to Comrade
Gorbachev,'' he said.
   His booming voice occasionally cracking from overuse, Yeltsin
spoke and answered questions for three hours in a conference hall at
the giant ZIL factory that is run by Yevgeny Brakov, his opponent in
the March 26 election for a seat representing Moscow in the congress.
   About 1,000 people were on hand, and they greeted Yeltsin warmly.
Workers outside the meeting hall spoke well of Brakov, but said
Yeltsin had more experience and that his support was strong among
the 80,000 workers at the giant conglomeration that produces
limousines, refrigerators and freezers, and a variety of other
durable goods.
   Brakov addressed a campaign rally elsewhere in Moscow.
   Yeltsin's candidacy has been thust into the limelight by what he
says is a campaign organized against him by the current Moscow party
leaders. Supporters have plastered campaign posters on walls all
over the city.
   Last week, the party Central Committee published Yeltsin's speech
that led to his being sacked as Moscow party leader in November
1987, in which he criticized the party's style of leadership and
warned of a possible Stalin-like cult of personality developing
around Gorbachev.
   The Central Committee later formed a commission to investigate
complaints that Yeltsin advocates a multiparty system and holds
other views at odds with party policies.
   Those perceived attacks on Yeltsin led to march through Moscow by
thousands of supporters Sunday and warnings Monday by an Interior
Ministry officials that such demonstrations disrupt public order.
   Yeltsin denied Tuesday he advocates competition for the Communist
Party. However, he said too many topics have been prohibited for too
long.
   ``Society is too dynamic and it is too difficult to say what will
happen in several years,'' Yeltsin said. ``Let's not make this topic
forbidden, and allow it to be discussed in the press.''
   Yeltsin hammered party and government bureaucracy and failed
economic reforms. The party adopted a policy last week to encourage
long-term leases by individual farmers to try to improve the
efficiency of the backward agricultural system and solve the
so-called ``food question.''
   ``We are already approaching the `food question' for the third
time, and all the time it's half-measures, half-measures,'' Yeltsin
said. The Soviet Union is suffering from inflation and a ``rather
dead-end'' economic policy that has eroded the ruble's buying power
by 60 percent, he said.
   One-third of the seats in the congress are reserved for
representatives of the party, its affiliates, and social and
professional organizations. Gorbachev already has been elected as a
delegate from the Communist Party.
   Bovin, a well-known figure in the West, failed to win one of the
10 seats from the Union of Journalists.
   In a separate election from the Union of Writers, editor Sergei
Zalygin of the literary journal Novy Mir and writer Valentin
Rasputin, who stresses ecological issues, were among the 10 selected.