More Americans should be taking action to
reduce the amount of radioactive radon gas in their homes because
long-term exposure to the gas increases the risk of lung cancer,
federal regulators said Tuesday.
   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency officials are concerned that
not enough homeowners are taking advantage of methods that can
reduce radon concentrations inside homes to safer levels, the
officials told a national convention of radon monitoring
associations.
   ``We're not seeing as many people mitigating, or fixing the
problem, as we'd like. Our concern is that people may think the
problem is too expensive to fix,'' said Michael Mardis, chief of the
EPA's Washington-based radon mitigation prevention and quality
assurance branch. ``The good news is you can do something about it.''
   Radon is an odorless, invisible gas which is released as a result
of the natural decay of uranium in soil. The uranium degenerates to
form radium, which decays into radon. The gas can filter into houses
from the soil through cracks in foundations and walls that contact
the ground.
   Mardis said the EPA has identified several methods for reducing
radon in homes. Such techniques include sealing of basement cracks
and installation of fans which can suck concentrations of the gas
from under houses.
   He said a homeowner can buy a radon measuring device for $10 to
$25 or hire a contractor to measure and remove the gas. Mardis said
the EPA has distributed to all 50 state health departments a list of
contractors who can measure radon concentrations in homes.
   The EPA also is trying to provide the states with a list of
contractors who can remove radon, Mardis said.
   He said it would cost a homeowner $1,000 to $1,500 to reduce
radon levels in a dwelling. He said that cost is comparable with
expenses for termite treatments or repairs of wet basements.
   ``We're not talking about wet feet. We're talking about lung
cancer cases in children,'' Mardis said. ``I think the big problem
is you can't see radon. You can touch it, you can't smell it ...
people aren't aware of it.''