About 300 leftist guerrillas firing
assault rifles and rocket-propelled grenades attacked the country's
main penitentiary Tuesday night, and authorities said three
prisoners and one guard were wounded.
   Vitelio Ramos, commander of Mariona prison outside Mejicanos,
told The Associated Press the rebels attacked from three sides.
   He said they failed to penetrate the prison itself, which is
surrounded by a 12-foot-high cinderblock wall topped with barbed
wire and razor blades, but did cut through the 10-foot-high wire
fence around the complex.
   A heavy exchange of fire lasted about 30 minutes, according to
several combatants. The rebels blew a hole in the prison's southern
wall, and one guard said ``several'' prisoners escaped.
   Ramos said he could not confirm that until the prisoners were
counted.
   Spent shells from AK-47 assault rifles lay scattered where the
rebels paused to fire.
   Ramos said three inmates were wounded, possibly in crossfire, and
one prison guard was seriously wounded.
   Nearly 1,800 men are incarcerated in Mariona. Each year the
prison undergoes a few attacks by rebels waging a 9-year-old war
against the U.S.-backed government.
   The rebels consider dozens of the inmates as political prisoners
and apparently attack the institution with the intention of freeing
them.
   ``Long live the FMLN!,'' some prisoners shouted at journalists
allowed into the penitentiary after the attack.
   The Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, or FMLN, is the
rebel army.
   Capt. Manuel de Jesus Ramos, second in command at the prison,
said about 160 guards were at the prison when the attack began at 6
p.m. (7 p.m. EST).
   Reinforcements from the elite Bracamonte army battalion operating
near the prison, seven miles north of San Salvador, arrived soon
after the attack began.
   A Bracamonte lieutenant, who identified himself only as Victor,
said about 150 soldiers reinforced the guards. He also estimated the
attacking force at about 300.
   Two of the three wounded prisoners were able to walk with
assistance. The third was carried out unconscious and soaked with
blood. All were placed on a truck for transport to the hospital.
   Earlier Tuesday, opponents of the right-wing Republican
Nationalist Alliance said a rebel boycott gave the party the
presidential election victory that means control of all three
branches of the government.